310
Part
C
C
traP
National Curriculum Framework for School Education National Curriculum Framework for School Education
4.6.1 Pedagogy for Science
Learning Science involves not just learning theories and facts of Science, but also making
connections between conceptual learning and real life, acquiring the capacities of scientific
inquiry, and most importantly, applying these to understanding the world.
Students like to explore the world around them and understand why and how things happen. In
this process of exploration, they use trial-and-error methods to test their hypotheses and reach
possible conclusions. This exploration need not take place individually - students learn Science
best through engaging with peers and adults.

311
Part
C
C
traP
National Curriculum Framework for School Education National Curriculum Framework for School Education
Students have theories about why things happen, patterns they see around them, and about
cause-and-effect relationships. As they learn about Science in a more formal set-up, these ideas
get tested. Some concepts fit into the students’ current understanding, while others require a
shift in thinking. If there is an alignment between current ideas and what is discussed in
classrooms, ideas get strengthened.
At the same time, some concepts do not fit into the students’ current thinking. If not addressed,
they can turn into alternative conceptions. For example, heavy objects fall faster, plants are non-
living because they don’t move, or heavy/ big objects always sink in water. If these ideas are not
challenged and suitably modified through investigation, they can turn into alternative conceptions
which may persist as students move through school.
Apart from these theories, students also bring with them the ability to reason, understand, and
explain relationships between cause and effect. These capacities serve as the basis for developing
scientific reasoning. Opportunities, therefore, to inquire are important, as opposed to being ‘told’.
Scientific values, such as honesty and integrity, also develop through ‘doing Science’. For example,
while demonstrating an experiment on the boiling point of water, we should write the reading on
the thermometer accurately, even if the water is not boiling at 100 degrees.
The role of the Teacher in aligning pedagogy and assessment with how students learn Science is
critical. Teachers must build an environment that promotes natural curiosity, encourages
questions, gives maximum possible opportunities for hands-on activities, and gives ample space
to discuss ideas. Opportunities for students to express their understanding through different
modes and formative assessments to track growing understanding are also key to learning
Science.
4.6.1.1 Pedagogic Principles
Science pedagogy across stages must be informed by the following principles:
a. Learning Science requires an active engagement of students with the world around them to
understand it. Science pedagogy achieves this through:
i. Simulating the processes of Science such as asking questions, hypothesising, observing,
testing, finding evidence, collecting data, analysing, modifying conclusions,
communicating, and re-questioning.
ii. Exposing students to a variety of aspects of learning Science in varied settings — the
laboratory, classroom, and field — through approaches such as inquiry, discovery,
didactic, hands-on Science.
iii. Encouraging and sustaining curiosity by providing varied experiences that may
challenge students’ existing notions and ideas.
b. Learning Science requires communication and sharing of ideas and observations. Science
pedagogy achieves this through:
i. Using scientific vocabulary during instruction and creating a variety of contexts and
situations for students to communicate their understanding, ideas, and observations.
ii. Peer and collaborative learning.

312
Part
C
C
traP
National Curriculum Framework for School Education National Curriculum Framework for School Education
c. Learning Science requires a gradual increase in the capacity to engage with complex and
abstract ideas, aligned with the cognitive and procedural capacities of students. Science
pedagogy achieves this by building on students’ existing knowledge and using multiple
representations (mathematical, graphical, diagrammatic, and models).
d. Learning Science requires making linkages between knowledge for the holistic and
multidisciplinary learning emphasised in NEP 2020. Science pedagogy achieves this
through:
i. Connecting scientific knowledge inside and outside the classroom.
ii. Horizontal connections with other curricular areas.
e. Learning Science enables the development of certain values, such as collaboration,
sensitivity, empathy, equality of opportunities, respect for diversity, and other values
mentioned in NEP 2020. Science pedagogy must facilitate this process.
4.6.1.2 Recommended Pedagogical Approaches and Settings
The same pedagogical approach can be used across the three settings most suitable for learning
Science - the classroom, the field, and the laboratory. This section recommends pedagogical
approaches across a variety of settings in detail. The following is a list of considerations based on
which Teachers can choose pedagogical approaches and settings:
a. The nature of a concept should guide the decision regarding the approach and setting.
For example, speed can be discussed in the playing field, but the structure of a cell
requires a microscope.
b. The approach and setting chosen should enable the attainment of learning outcomes
and competencies.
c. Each of the recommended approaches and settings must be selected at least once in an
academic year, if not more. This will ensure exposure to varied approaches and settings.
d. Even when Teachers choose a didactic approach, areas that students could have
potentially inquired about or discovered should be highlighted.
a. Hands-on Science
The most important part of learning Science is actually ‘doing Science’ through hands-on
experiential learning. ‘Doing Science’ can range from trial and error, using materials around
them, or using basic scientific instruments (measuring instruments), and laboratory
apparatus. In this process, students gain conceptual understanding and develop capacities
through manipulating, designing, and building experiments and demonstrations.
b. Discovery approach
Students explore the natural world following their own interests and discover patterns of
how the world works during their explorations. Teachers may also create opportunities or
draw attention to natural phenomena that students can explore further. Often, this discovery
is followed by other, more structured approaches to ensure learning. For example, the Teacher
draws the attention of the students to changes in the length of the shadows as the day
progresses or to the venation patterns of the leaves of different plants. Students’ observations
on shadows are then connected to scientific concepts such as the path of light, and the
venation pattern is connected to the shapes of the leaves.

313
Part
C
C
traP
National Curriculum Framework for School Education National Curriculum Framework for School Education
c. Inquiry approach
The inquiry approach allows students to navigate through unknown questions and explore
solutions on their own. It allows students to work in the same way as scientists. The inquiry
approach engages students with systematic observation, visualising, experimenting,
inferring, communicating, and discovering relations. This approach allows Teachers to
choose the appropriate type of inquiry with respect to the concept and to scaffold (support
as per need) students’ learning. For example, students could explore questions such as: How
do the image characteristics vary with the relative position between lens and object? How
does the surface area of the reactants affect the rate of reaction? How does the intensity of
light affect the rate of photosynthesis?
d. Project-centred approach
This approach allows learning within the classroom to continue outside the classroom and
extend over a period of time. For example, observing the changes in the moon over a month
to understand the phases of the moon. In this process, connections to daily life are also made.
The project-centred approach allows students to develop artefacts/products (charts,
presentations, speeches) that reflect and communicate their emerging understanding. It also
allows the integration of concepts across different curricular areas. For example, visits to the
sites of local professional communities and interactions with the people engaged there, such
as potters, weavers, craftspersons, farmers, blacksmiths, carpenters, and electricians would
enable integrating concepts from vocational education and art with Science.
e. Didactic approach
Often, teaching Science involves communicating certain important information in the form of
scientific terms, phenomena, and the historical development of concepts and ideas. In this
approach, the Teacher largely regulates the direction and flow of the lesson. For example,
after students have discovered changes in the length of the shadows throughout the day, the
Teacher can explain the effect of the position of the sun on the length of the shadow and how
students can use it to keep track of the time as well.
f. Demonstration
The Teacher demonstrates the working of certain instruments or outcomes of experimental
set-ups to draw the attention of the students to relevant concepts. These demonstrations
enrich students’ learning experiences of the concepts.
These approaches can be implemented in a variety of settings. A combination of the
recommended pedagogical approaches and settings is also often needed to be used for
teaching a concept.
The box below illustrates a Science class that uses some of these pedagogical approaches
within a laboratory setting in the voice of a Teacher.

314
Part
C
C
traP
National Curriculum Framework for School Education National Curriculum Framework for School Education
Teacher’s Voice 4.6i
Demonstrating Osmosis in Living Cells
For my Grade 9 students, I planned a demonstration of osmosis in living cells. They
already are familiar with the concept in form of daily life examples such as what causes
pruning of our fingers if kept in water for long, but in this session, we go a level deeper to
observe the process in living cells under the microscope.
We will have a total of 90 minutes to perform this. Hence, I prepare the material such as
common salt (NaCl) solution and cut onion pieces and equipment such as glass slides,
forceps, and microscopes. Students work in multiple groups. Hence, I prepare as many
instruction/observation recording sheets.
On that day, I begin by demonstrating the experiment — I prepare three slides A, B and C,
add drops of solution in varying quantity, place coverslip, and then observe under the
microscope what is happening to the cells in the onion peel on the slide.
Then all groups repeat this same set of actions and record their observation by drawing
on the sheet provided. Post this, we discuss whatever we observed. After the students
discuss possible inferences, I introduce the term ‘osmosis’ to the class, using the concept
to explain their observations and share more daily life examples where we see this
phenomena — for example, in the process of pickling.
4.6.1.3 Horizontal Connections
a. Horizontal connections with other curricular areas are necessary for the holistic and
multidisciplinary learning emphasised in NEP 2020. Some curricular goals and
competencies in both the Middle and Secondary Stage are designed to ensure horizontal
connections between Science and other curricular areas. At the same time, pedagogy must
be designed so that these connections are made in the classroom.
b. Pedagogic approaches and methods such as inquiry and projects, by their nature, provide
scope to utilise concepts and capacities that cut across the disciplines of Science — for
example, a project on investigating the sound produced by different musical instruments,
and how this sound can be varied. Qualities and properties of sound produced both in terms
of aesthetics, physics concepts involved, mathematical patterns, and human perception lead
to a holistic appreciation and integration of competencies across curricular areas.
c. Pedagogic methods such as surveys and field-based methods enable students to see
concepts through socio-cultural, economic, emotional, and scientific lenses — for example, a
survey of traditional medicinal and cooking practices and their connection with the seasons.
4.6.1.4 Resources in Science Teaching
Science laboratories are essential for a good Science Education class. However, there are no
separate rooms for Science laboratories in the majority of Middle schools currently, although

315
Part
C
C
traP
National Curriculum Framework for School Education National Curriculum Framework for School Education
Science kits are provided. In this situation, Teachers can use their classrooms or any open space
for conducting experiments. The following must inform the use of resources:
a. The materials and equipment should be simple and easy to use. This makes it more likely
that they will be used in classrooms by Teachers. At the Middle Stage, Science kits available
at most schools provide a good start.
b. However, teaching should not be restricted to the Science kits. The more materials students
use, the more opportunities they get to do Science and hence learn Science. Improvised
apparatus can be made using inexpensive materials to extend the use of materials beyond
the Science kit. For example, a measuring jar can be made out of discarded transparent glass
bottles, - using measuring cups (that usually come with syrup bottles) and syringes for
calibration.
c. At this Stage, if the school can provide dedicated lab space, with adequate space for simple
materials and resources, it must be done.
d. At the same time, doing Science must not be restricted to Science laboratories or Science
kits. Classrooms, especially in the Middle Stage, must allow the doing of Science. At the same
time, all safety considerations must be kept in mind.
e. Tinkering laboratories – informal spaces where students can ‘play’ with simple scientific
materials and equipment independently – can be set up in any room within the school. This
will help students strengthen design thinking, creating, and experimental capacities.
Initially, students would have to be supported by the Teacher.
f. Students at the Secondary Stage would require standard scientific equipment and
apparatus and basic infrastructure in which they can perform experiments with
convenience and safety. Therefore, Secondary schools should have well-equipped,
resourceful, and spacious Science laboratories to conduct Science experiments and
investigations.
g. If a school has a laboratory but the number of students is large, the Teacher can either allow
students to do the experiments in groups or ask students to perform the experiments on
alternate days.
h. Budgets for Science in the Middle and Secondary Stages are limited, so Science equipment
and materials should be inexpensive. However, if the equipment is of inferior quality (e.g.,
weak magnet, cheap microscope with plastic lens), it may not be worth using.
i. Alternatives can be used. For example, in case of unavailability of litmus paper, a Teacher
can use turmeric solution or turmeric paper strips for identifying the acidic and basic
characteristics of the substances. For this, the Teacher can take turmeric (powder or solid)
and add it on a paper or in a glass cup containing water. This solution can be used for the
identification of acids and bases. The Teacher can also make wet paper strips dipped in
turmeric solution. Students can be asked to do the following — dry these paper strips,
prepare solutions of each substance in water, dip the strip in the solution, and check the
colour change of the turmeric paper strips. Could you make a list of changes in the colours
of these substances?