393
C
traP
National Curriculum Framework for School Education National Curriculum Framework for School Education
7.4.3 Content
The approach, principles, and methods of selecting content have commonalities across subjects
— those have been discussed in Part A, Chapter 3, §3.2 of this document. This section focusses
only on what is most critical to The World Around Us. Hence, it will be useful to read this section
along with the above-mentioned section.
7.4.3.1 Principles of Content Selection
The following principles will inform the selection of content for The World Around Us.
a. Content selected must enable the development of essential process capacities (observation,
making hypotheses, experimentation to test hypotheses, data collection and analysis,
discussion). For example,
i. Assign tasks based on the natural curiosity of students with reference to specific
questions/assumptions/hypotheses– they could be asked to observe and record the
growth of plants from seeds under different conditions (in different kinds of soil, under
different amounts of sunlight).
ii. Extend this experience to students' own lives and ask them to describe their observations
and hypotheses on how crops/plants grow in pots. They can discuss the various uses of
plants
iii. Organise visits to local markets, fairs, museum, and monuments, and share observations
and experiences throughout the processes using different modes
iv. Conduct hands-on experiments to test hypotheses and make informed conclusions.
Experiments can be conducted in groups to encourage collaboration, teamwork, and
social interaction
b. Content selected should enable maximum possible social interaction, and interaction with
the natural environment. For example,
i. Identity and relationships within family and community; plants and animals; own body;
geographical features; transportation and communication; local institutions; migration
of families; different habits in different communities (food, practices, traditions); food
habits and shelter of animals; various local traditional art forms; festivals and celebrations;
community melas and marriage celebrations; day and night, time of sunrise and sunset,
patterns; sun, moon, stars, and planets
c. Content selected should reflect diversity and must be inclusive while developing sensitivity
and breaking stereotypes. For example,

394
Part
C
National Curriculum Framework for School Education National Curriculum Framework for School Education
i. Diversity of geographical characteristics, flora, and fauna around them
ii. Impact of hot weather or excessive rain on plants and animals
iii. Practices related to work especially with reference to gender – division of labour at home,
food distribution in families, understanding the context of migrant labourers.
d. Content must move from the local context to an understanding of social and natural
environments beyond the immediate environment as students progress across grades.
i. Content should be contextual and related to the immediate environment in lower
grades of this Stage.
ii. Gradually increasing exposure to other contexts through comparison and analogy is
important — multiple geographies, genders, communities. For example, if the concept
of 'Transport' has to be discussed, content can include the pictures in the textbook,
discussion of modes of transport in the community, sharing of narratives of travel by
students, local news reports related to transportation, instances of use of these roads
by the local community, videos of modes of transport that are not available in the
locality (e.g., understanding trains in a school in the upper Himalayas).
e. Content selected should be such that it can be presented in multiple ways, which go beyond
the textbook. For example, students should have the opportunity to explore the same
content in various modes as indicated below:
i. Case studies
ii. Visual representation through pictures and simple maps
iii. Using ICT-based resources – videos to give evidence for discussions and/or support
discussions on specific issues
iv. Poems, stories, plays, games, and news stories
v. Folklore, folk songs, oral histories, and oral narratives
vi. Visual art projects
vii. Building of models, scientific tinkering, and engaging in hands-on experiments to test
hypotheses
f. Environmental values and dispositions must be integrated in the content and should enable
pedagogy that is not didactic/prescriptive. For example,
i. Judicious use of water
ii. Dignity of all living beings
iii. Impact of humans on the environment
iv. Needs of plants and animals
g. Content must incorporate Indian knowledge and local culture. For example,
i. Food preservation
ii. Processes to conserve resources, including local wells and stepwells
iii. Local literature – alignment with contemporary knowledge, natural disasters, and
human-nature conflicts

395
C
traP
National Curriculum Framework for School Education National Curriculum Framework for School Education
7.4.4 Pedagogy and Assessment
The approach, principles, and methods of pedagogy and assessment have commonalities across
subjects – those have been discussed in Part A, Chapter 3, §3.3 and §3.4 of this document. This
section focusses only on what is most critical to The World Around Us. Hence, it will be useful to
read this section along with the above-mentioned section.
7.4.4.1 Pedagogy for The World Around Us
Environment, for students in the Preparatory Stage, is what is immediately around them and
affects their lives. Students learn about the environment through structured interaction with
their natural and social environment, exploration, discussion of experiences and observations,
interaction with adults and peers, exemplars, task-oriented activities, structured observations,
experiments, surveys, and visits.
This engagement with the immediate environment provides a base for moving into exploring
larger systems (from locality to district to region to state to nation to world), broader issues
(from home to community to larger society), and an expanding understanding of concerns,
connections, and consequences. Thus, students' engagement with their immediate environment
leads them to an understanding of distant environments — they are able to apply their
understanding from 'near' to 'far', and vice versa.
Values and dispositions — e.g., collaboration, respect for diversity, inclusion, scientific temper,
sensitivity towards the social and natural environment are best developed if they are demonstrated
— by adults in the school. Students must also get the opportunity to practise them in their
interactions.
7.4.4.1.1 Pedagogical Approaches
Students' questions and experiences — related to the social and physical environment, and of
social processes around them (including schools and family) — must be given space. This
establishes trust and empathy between the Teacher and students.
Teachers need to help students develop conceptual understanding instead of accumulating facts.
This implies that sufficient time must be provided for surveys, exploration, visits to institutions,
excursions (including within the school campus), observation, experiments, simple inquiry,
dialogue with Teachers and peers, role play, questioning, and the communication of ideas.
Task-oriented work, wherein they take up some small tasks, helps students connect learning to
doing. Through the creation of simple models and toys, they can communicate their understanding
and make learning concrete in the process. Allowing students to take the lead in material
development, through a variety of modes like art and craft, story, drama, and hands-on
experiments provides space for them to be involved in several small-scale and large-scale
assignments and projects. This is also invaluable for the development of prevocational capacities.
Teachers must also be aware of values and dispositions that can be developed through activities,
and plan deliberately to offer students experiences. They should also make the values and
dispositions explicit for students by drawing attention to them. They should also make them
explicit for students by drawing attention to specific values and dispositions (e.g., collaborative
learning, developing a scientific temper, working in diverse groups, analysing work distribution
at home, caring for the environment, cleanliness, standing in queues).
