--- Page 1 ---
347
C
traP
National Curriculum Framework for School Education National Curriculum Framework for School Education
5.6.1 Pedagogy for Social Science
Social Science is often taught as a fixed set of facts without an understanding of how interpretations
play a role in its construction. This has pushed students towards memorising facts and figures
from a textbook, which is not an actual learning of Social Science. A Social Science classroom
must be participatory and interactive in nature. It is only when students are allowed to immerse
themselves in the process of Social Science thinking that they learn the subject better.
5.6.1.1 Pedagogical Considerations
The following pedagogical considerations should be kept in mind while planning for Social
Science classes:
a. Classroom transactions should help students engage with the method of doing Social
Science so that learners can appreciate the methods for knowledge creation in Social
Science. For instance, students may be encouraged to notice patterns in the distribution of
different forms of government, such as democracies, monarchies, and dictatorships across
the globe and propose reasons (historical, geographical, socio-political, and economic) for
the existence of those patterns.
b. Classroom teaching should inculcate an awareness and appreciation of normative
concerns. Students should be given opportunities to reflect on various social and
environmental issues in their own environment. This should lead to thinking and discussing
of meaningful responses to these challenges.
c. Multidisciplinary thinking should be encouraged and supported to ensure that
students develop a holistic and integrated understanding of concepts as they appear in
society. Any event in history needs to be interpreted in the socio-political or economic
contexts of its origin; any geographical phenomena should be evaluated from its impact on
space and human lives and its influence on the economy and society. Similarly, any
economic concept needs to be understood from its historical and socio-political contexts.
d. A Social Science classroom should be a place for contesting ideas, debating, and
arguing with empathy and care. Students must be encouraged to share their diverse
experiences and reasoning without the fear of being judged or ridiculed. The Teacher must
refrain from imposing their own beliefs and biases on the students and should train
students towards looking at one issue from several viewpoints. The entire pedagogy in a
Social Science classroom should be an attempt to reveal newer dimensions of social reality
and work towards creating self-awareness and introspection among Teachers and students.
e. Facts and concepts in Social Science should be made relevant to the students’
contexts and experiences. Such sharing and interactions must be respectful of the cultural
and socio-economic differences and multiple perspectives among students.
f. Concepts in Social Science need to be clarified with adequate depth and rigour: In a
Social Science classroom, adequate time and attention should be given to concept formation
and clarity. For example, students need to understand the processes of weathering and
erosion to see their impact on topography and human civilisation; they must engage with
the meaning of different types of sources of evidence to frame meaningful interpretations of
historical events; and develop a comprehensive understanding of concepts of plurality and
--- Page 2 ---
348
Part
C
National Curriculum Framework for School Education National Curriculum Framework for School Education
democracy to appreciate the values enshrined in the Constitution and those stressed upon
in NEP 2020. The overall classroom environment should encourage academic rigour in
acquiring knowledge.
g. The opportunity to engage with various social-political and environmental matters
through investigating and interpreting multiple sources of evidence available, such as
documentaries, literature (books, local stories, travelogues), newspaper reports, and
relevant films should be undertaken. Selecting materials that are relatable to students and
help in developing curiosity about the discipline should be prioritised. At the same time,
care should be taken to ensure that materials are taken from reliable sources of information
and do not depict biases for or against a particular thought, philosophy, group, or people.
h. Authentic tasks/performance-based tasks, such as project-based learning activities
and assignments, should be incorporated to give learners an opportunity to develop
different types of capacities such as surveying, data analysis, problem solving, and
collaborative skills to validate and investigate their assumptions and beliefs.
5.6.1.2 Pedagogical Strategies
To design lessons around these considerations, there are many strategies that Teachers can
deploy. Illustratively:
a. Inquiry: Inquiry-based methods help students understand how social scientists generate
knowledge. For instance, students can make and test hypotheses about factors that
influence migration in their locality or region, the genesis of various settlement patterns in
their region, why specific types of occupations are more prevalent in specific regions, and
so on.
b. Issues-based learning: Issues-based learning can be a conducive tool for acquainting
students with various aspects of social realities, integrating perspectives from different
disciplines in investigating the causes of problems, and thinking about relevant social
action. As a subject addressing normative concerns, it is also vital that students learn much
of the Social Science content by engaging with real issues in their immediate/related
context. For instance, students may consider the problem of drinking water shortage in
their area, which may involve engaging with questions such as – What are the available
sources of water? How does water consumption differ across different parts of the region/
locality? Are there wastages that can be avoided? How is water being made accessible to all
sections of society? Is there unequal distribution? What steps are being taken to purify
water? How is it being made available to the poorer sections of society?
c. Conversations, discussions, and debates: Conversations are extremely vital in a Social
Science classroom. These conversations should lead to focussed discussions on concepts,
ideas, belief systems, and value claims. Sometimes these discussions may turn into debates
in the classroom. It is important to encourage such debates, as it provides students with the
opportunity to put forth their perspectives, resolve conflicts, iron out contradictory ideas,
and learn from each other. However, care must be taken that such discussions and debates
do not hurt the sentiments of any social group. Some common topics for discussion could
be on climate change, diversity in clothing and types of food as per historical and
geographical reasons and practising democratic processes in schools.
--- Page 3 ---
349
C
traP
National Curriculum Framework for School Education National Curriculum Framework for School Education
d. Role plays and simulations: Role plays and simulations may help students explore
decision-making processes and find means for conflict resolution. For instance, role plays of
the Gram Panchayat/Corporation may be used as a vehicle to explain the functioning of a
democratic institution.
e. Community service and field excursions: Community service is yet another engaging
strategy in a Social Science classroom. It not only involves concrete experiences for learning
concepts from the curriculum, but also enables students to develop the desired values.
Students may take up various projects to work with local government agencies to acquire
first-hand experience of issues and work with people in need. Similarly, field excursions are
meaningful ways of engaging with the content, e.g., nature walks, heritage walks, food
walks, and visits to police stations, museums, post offices, planetariums, and government
and digital archives.
f. Reflective essays: Students can write reflective essays on various topics related to the
curriculum. These essays can also be used by Teachers to assess the extent to which
students have learnt the desired concepts and skills. For instance, a reflective essay topic
could be, ‘How will dams transform agricultural productivity in India?’, ‘What are the issues
and opportunities of linking rivers?’, ‘What sustainable agricultural strategies could a region
adopt if its main river turns seasonal or dries up?’, or ‘Is waste management and disposal
the sole responsibility of municipalities and other government agencies?
g. Project work: Effective Social Science teaching happens when students collaborate for a
project or a specific task. These could be conducting surveys and interviews (e.g., household
surveys, interviews with stakeholders of the society such as village sarpanch), drawing a
map of their classroom, investigating historical sources in their region, tabulating the types
of bazaars/marketsSuch projects should be collaboratively designed along with students
with sufficient time given to collect data, analyse it, and present it in the classrooms.
h. Some specific opportunities for projects to create models and artefacts: Students
should be given opportunities where they can apply their knowledge to create models and
artefacts. These could be in the form of poster-making, collections (old coins, newspapers,
stamps, types of rocks, leaves, flowers, photographs, pamphlets), models (2-dimensional or
3-dimensional, e.g., monuments, volcanoes, still scenes), videos of rallies/haat bazaars/
book fairs/any social events in their surroundings.

