NCF PEDAGOGY FOR MATHEMATICS — MIDDLE STAGE
Source: National Curriculum Framework for School Education (NCF-SE)
Section: 3.6.1 Pedagogy for Mathematics
================================================================================

3.6.1 Pedagogy for Mathematics
Traditional approaches to teaching mathematics directly jump into abstract symbolic
manipulation. This is not very effective in making mathematics accessible to learners. There are
several steps before the learner is ready for symbolic manipulations. The first step is to have
concrete experiences that embody the mathematical concept involved. Once the learners have
immersed themselves in this experience, discussing this experience using language is the next
level of abstraction. This language use can then be represented as pictures or diagrams. Finally,
these pictures can be converted into the symbols that are used in Mathematics to represent that
particular concept or idea. Effective Mathematics pedagogy should take into consideration this
sequence for developing a conceptual understanding of mathematics.

For students, problem-solving and problem-posing are critical steps in learning Mathematics.
Practice and independent problem solving help students process and remember difficult
concepts, and this should be encouraged in the classroom as frequently as possible. Students
should also be encouraged to solve problems and puzzles in groups, so that they can see different
approaches towards solving a problem and have conversations about mathematical concepts,
thereby making them more graspable. They should also be encouraged to pose questions and
come up with new problems.
Many students from the Preparatory Stage onwards enjoy learning via scientific experiments
performed in laboratories. Students get to experience the following stages of scientific discovery:
observing a phenomenon in nature, setting up an experiment in a lab, performing the experiment
and noting down observations, trying to find a pattern, and then finally trying to explain the
phenomenon. Unfortunately, current practices in Mathematics teaching does not expose students
to such a journey. Mathematics is too often presented as a finished product which is purely
demonstrative and formal. Guessing using increasingly developed intuition, a skill needed to
discover new theorems and their proofs, is discouraged in Mathematics classes.
It is possible to show this ‘experimental’ nature of Mathematics using an inductive method of
teaching at the Preparatory, Middle, and Secondary Stages. The idea is to develop teaching
material consisting of appropriate Mathematics experiments. Students can work in groups and
guessing can be encouraged. For example, an experiment could encourage students to write down the first few even numbers as sums of two smaller numbers and lead them to observe that they can
always be written as sum of 2 primes. Guidance from the Teacher should lead them to conjecture
that ‘any even number greater than 2 is a sum of 2 primes’. They should collect as much evidence
as possible. Though this particular problem is unsolved, towards the end, each student could be
given an opportunity to talk about their experiment (instead of proving/ disproving the
statement). Many such experiments in number theory, geometry, and combinatorics could be
prepared. Such activities have the potential to greatly enhance intuition and problem-solving
ability.
Mathematics also naturally provides many opportunities for critical thinking, in the form of
interrogating definitions, formulating, or choosing alternative proofs, conjectures, explanations,
representations, or generalisations. Curriculum and pedagogy need to provide room and
educational opportunity for such thinking. For example, working on match-stick geometry helps
interrogate geometric assertions. Students should be encouraged to define their own geometric
objects and classes of numbers with specific properties to encourage experimentation, creativity, discovery, and critical thinking.

3.6.1.1 Instructional Practices
a. Students should be exposed to multiple ways of seeing the same mathematical concept. This
could be through pictures, symbols, different motivations or applications, and different
descriptions in spoken language. Each of these provides a distinct perspective, and they
together help the student form their own understanding of the mathematical concept.

b. The Teacher should encourage students to express their understanding in their own words
using mathematical vocabulary and terms (including in their own home language when
different from the medium of instruction). Opportunities should be created for
mathematical conversations between students.

c. The Teacher should provide opportunities for students to engage in meaningful discussions
involving questions that require explanations (such as ‘How could you explain your thinking
to someone just beginning to learn this?’ or ‘How do you know?’). Habits of verification
should be inculcated from an early age. When a student has distributed 24 toffees among 8
students, it is important to not only ask ‘Has everyone gotten an equal number of toffees?’,
but also to follow up with ‘How do you know?’

d. The Teacher can incorporate problem-solving tasks in the classroom that serve multiple
purposes. Problems can be chosen to review concepts previously studied by students and
link them to new concepts. The task can be designed so that students have to reason
through questions, and then justify their thinking orally or in writing.

e. Teachers can use physical models, diagrams, graphing calculators, simulations, computer
algebra systems, games, and other tools to help students model situations, visualise
concepts, think through a problem, and devise strategies for solutions.
f. Small-group work can be an effective way of learning Mathematics. Discussions and
problem solving in groups give students the opportunity to talk about Mathematics, ask
questions they may be hesitant to ask the teacher, and work on harder problems by pooling
together their understanding. However, it should be of short duration to manage the groups
effectively.

g. Meaningful practice, through worksheets, puzzles, games, mental and oral Mathematics,
group work, and homework involving paper and pencil, should be an integral part of the
Mathematics classroom. Practice problems should be designed so that students revisit
concepts and techniques and see different situations where a certain technique can be used.
When choosing problems and guiding students to solve them, teachers should ensure that
students are actively learning and not just memorising techniques.

h. During the Middle and Secondary stages, opportunities should be provided for reading
simple mathematical text and writing mathematical content. Mathematical communication
should be explicitly signalled as an item of teaching and learning. Books and online resource
material should be provided by schools for this purpose.

Teacher’s Voice 3.6i
Discovering the Magic of Mathematics!
In geometry, there is a lot of learning through axioms, corollaries, and theorems which
often leave students wondering ‘Where did this come from!? Does it happen every time!?’
So, what I do is I usually introduce such things through activities. For example, to learn
that ‘sum of all internal angles in a quadrilateral is equal to 360⁰,’ we do a simple activity.
I ask students to draw any random quadrilateral and then label their internal angles as
∟1, ∟2, ∟3 and ∟4 as shown in the picture below. Next, I ask the students to measure
the 4 angles to discover the sum is around 360⁰. Alternatively, when one cuts these angles
and join them to meet their all four vertices at a point without leaving any gap (as seen
below) to form a complete angle — one discovers that the sum is 360⁰. Here, my emphasis is always on designing activities that help my students learn mathematical concepts instead of just memorising them as facts and formulae. This is an example of inductive method of teaching theorems, one could also use deductive methods to teach these theorems.

3.6.1.2 Some Suggested Methods of Teaching
a. Play-way (activity-based) method: In play-way or activity-based learning, students use
toys, games, and puzzles to explore mathematics. This may involve physical games, or
games/activities involving aids such as dice, puzzles, dominoes, and building blocks
Incorporating play can help make some mathematical notions seem more natural and
relevant to students, and also enables them to be creative, pose questions, collaborate with
others, and use multiple senses to learn. For students who feel alienated by Mathematics,
this may help them enjoy the subject and feel more confident in their ability to
understand it.
b. Inquiry-based method: This method allows students to explore mathematical content by
posing, investigating, and answering questions and sharing their findings with their peers
for them to critique. Through this method, the student learns to reason and collaborate
with their peers to discover mathematical patterns and truths.
c. Problem-solving method: Word and logic puzzles (including puzzles that use elimination
grids to solve logic problems) are a fun way to teach deductive reasoning. Simple puzzles
can help develop students’ logical and creative thinking skills in an enjoyable manner.
d. Inductive method: Inductive method is based on the principle of induction. Induction is
the process to establish a generalised truth by showing that if it is true for a reasonably
adequate number of cases, then it is true for all such cases. Thus, the inductive method of
teaching leads us from known to unknown, from a particular case to a general rule and
from concrete to abstract. When a number of concrete cases have been understood, the
student is able to attempt a generalisation. Students are presented with a series of
individual concrete cases, and they are expected to come up with a generalised and abstract
mathematical representation of these cases. This method can help students discover
patterns in numbers or geometry, which they may later encounter as theorems or formulae.
Such discoveries reveal the beauty that drives many people to study mathematics.
e. Deductive method: Deduction is the process by which a particular fact is derived from
some generally known truths. Thus, in the deductive method of teaching, the student
proceeds from general to particular, from abstract to concrete, or from formula to examples.
Here, a pre-established rule or formula is given to the student, and they are asked to solve
the related problems by using that formula or to prove theorems using definitions, axioms,
and postulates.
Each of the methods above has its own advantages and limitations. It is also true that one method does not work for all students, and so the Teacher must draw on their understanding of their class and choose a combination of methods to ensure the learning of every student. The matrix below suggests methods in rows and Stages in three columns.
Table 3.6i — Suggestive Methods by Stage
Key: MORE_OFTEN = use most frequently | OFTEN = use regularly | LESS_OFTEN = use occasionally

Method               | Preparatory  | Middle      | Secondary
---------------------|--------------|-------------|------------
Play-way             | MORE_OFTEN   | OFTEN       | LESS_OFTEN
Discovery/Inquiry    | OFTEN        | MORE_OFTEN  | OFTEN
Problem solving      | OFTEN        | MORE_OFTEN  | MORE_OFTEN
Inductive            | MORE_OFTEN   | OFTEN       | LESS_OFTEN
Deductive            | LESS_OFTEN   | OFTEN       | MORE_OFTEN

Middle Stage Summary: Discovery/Inquiry and Problem-solving are the primary recommended methods (MORE_OFTEN). Play-way and Inductive methods are used regularly (OFTEN). Deductive method is used regularly (OFTEN) as students begin formal proof-based reasoning.

3.6.1.3 Integrating Mathematics with Other Curricular Areas
An interdisciplinary approach enables students to expand their horizons by allowing them to
consider and tackle problems that do not fit exactly into one subject. It also changes how students
learn by enabling them to synthesise multiple perspectives, instead of driving their thoughts
unidirectionally based on the understanding of one discipline. It allows students to explore and
involve multiple perspectives and dimensions from different curricular areas to deal with daily
life problems. Hence, integrating Mathematics with other Curricular Areas can help students
develop interest in the subject and build a holistic view of different disciplines.
Mathematics learning can thus be made more meaningful and interesting by integrating it with
other curricular areas. Some possibilities for doing this are described below:
a. Integrating Mathematics and Art: Art and Mathematics are closely linked, with both
disciplines playing an important role in understanding patterns, as well as enhancing
spatial abilities and visualisation. Many activities that are a part of students’ lives, such as

music, dance, needlework, and rangoli naturally lead them to see patterns, which can be
described and further understood using mathematical language. Integrating the Arts with
Mathematics can include art and craft activities that engage students in creating visual
patterns, tessellations, and geometric objects, and can include exposure to examples of
artworks that contain interesting patterns. Some ideas for integrating Art in the
Mathematics classroom are:
i. Creating and analysing different rangoli/kolam patterns.
ii. Creating origami, and using it to understand angles, symmetries, and how a 2D object
can be transformed into a 3D one.
iii. Recognising geometries and symmetries in art and architecture.
iv. Symmetry can also be explored through dance and movement by assigning mirroring
exercises for students. This concept can also be explored through visual games, self-
designed board games, simple print-making activities based on traditional art forms
like Rogan printing, and by viewing examples of architecture, painting, and sculpture.
v. Pattern activities could also include art forms, like weaving, embroidery, and bead
work, where patterning is heavily reliant on mathematical precision, grids, and
matrices.
vi. Ratio and proportion are fundamental to the arts. The technique of drawing the human
body requires an understanding of proportion (e.g., the length of an arm is about thrice
the length of the head). The study of ratios and proportions can also be related to
different cultures and their canons of beauty being defined by specific ratios and
proportions.
vii. Music is filled with patterns. The joy of making music lies in creating innumerable
permutations and combinations of patterns by grouping notes, sounds, and beats.
Tempo determines how notes can be combined and fitted into specific rhythm cycles in
multiple variations. Music is an extremely useful way to understand fractions since it
uses full notes, half notes, quarter notes, and one-eighth notes which also relate to
tempo in terms of ek gun, dugun, trigun, chaugun. Improvisation in the classical forms
of music require an immense alertness and ability to do mental math. For example,
creating note patterns in multiples of 3, 5, or 7 in a 4-beat rhythm can be, both
challenging and aesthetically pleasing.
The way frequencies are chosen in music also involves understanding simple fractions,
due to what sounds good and most resonant to the ear. For example, the ratio of
frequencies of the top and bottom Sa in a saptak is 2:1, and the ratio of frequencies of
Pa and Sa is 3:2. There are reasons from Physics (namely, the notion of resonance) as to
why particular combinations of notes sound good to the ear, and the notes (shrutis) that
are used in Indian classical music (and also in music around the world), as explained in
Bharata’s Natyashastra, is based on simple whole number ratios of frequencies.
b. Integrating Mathematics and Sports: Integrating mathematics and Sports can benefit
students who enjoy sports and see the relevance of measurement, unit conversion,
probability and statistics, scoring systems, and trajectories of thrown objects in the context
of sports. Student projects can explore mathematical connections such as in the Fosbury
Flop in high jump or the Duckworth Lewis Scoring System in cricket.

c. Integrating Mathematics and Science. The appearance of the Virahanka numbers and the
golden angle in nature (e.g., in pinecones, sunflowers, daisies, kaner and tulsi plants) make
for an excellent interdisciplinary journey of discovery.
Similarly, other Curricular Areas can also be integrated with Mathematics to understand and see
more meaning of Mathematics in daily life.